
## [HOME](scrolls/home)

# Organic Media

In a consumption-based civilization the purpose of all media is to
stimulate consumption. This can come in the form of advertising,
corporate propaganda, or the legitimization of the imperial power
required to keep mines and long distance supply chains operating. In the
age of digital media we find that the hardware itself is also a large
component of how it facilitates consumption, with planned obsolescence
creating a stream from mine to landfill unprecedented in human history.
A constant race to build ever more exotic materials and technologies
into physical media devices creates a vast suction across the planet,
forcing every corner of the globe to exploit anything that can be mined
for digital media hardware from cobalt to lithium to be exploited as
fast and widely as possible.

This state of affairs creates a powerful opportunity for a new type of
media. The fact that the existing system pumps out this constant stream
of new objects with all the stuff needed for advanced information
technology creates a resource which can be used to build new hybrid
technologies designed to incorporate scavenged parts from the discarded
tech. The tech industry is now working on turning out *trillions* of
“internet of things” devices–objects which have built-in networking
capability and could in theory serve as web servers. Based on how these
industries are structured we know that these will all be designed to
fail on a very short time scale, and what they are selling today will be
in a landfill in less than 5 years.

It is worth marveling at the scale of consumption built into the current
digital media system before discussing the alternative. People walk
around with screens in their pockets, the sole purpose of which is to
manipulate them into consuming more. Those screens are built on a
technology which uses the most exotic materials known to humanity,
extracted at great human cost from every corner of the globe. And then
they are forced into obsolescence within months in some cases by a
software industry which is based around the idea of planned
obsolescence. Having pushed their way into the pockets, homes and
workplaces of something like half the humans on Earth, the industry is
now pushing to put their devices in things which have no reason to be
part of this network, like toasters and juice makers. The sheer insanity
of this is hard to wrap ones head around, but because the entire media
is controlled by this industry it is hard to even articulate in public
how insane this is. And it is getting worse very quickly. The need to
replace this parasitic monster with media which serves the needs of
humanity could not be more urgent!

What we want from a media technology to build our new trash-based
civilization on is to replace consumption with replication. We are now
constantly buying new machines built from mined materials which
constantly tell us to consume more things. Consumption-based media forms
a consumption information loop. We want to form a replication-based
loop, where the media is built from trash and contains the information
required to replicate itself. We call this “organic media”, because it
behaves like a living thing. In fact it effectively *is* a living thing.
If we built closed loop systems in which humanity is re-using material
again and again forever in order to live in harmony with the world
around us, it makes sense to think of us in combination with our media
and the ecosystems we live in as a living system.

This idea of “organic” media is in direct contrast to “viral” media
which dominates in social media today. In viral media, information
replicates, just as viruses replicate themselves inside a living
organism, but the this is always happening in a space defined by a fixed
media entity. Social media platforms encourage information to replicate
as fast as possible within their systems, as that costs them nothing and
induces more people to keep coming back to their platform to be
manipulated by their advertisers. But if someone tries to replicate the
media platform itself by for instance trying to start a new platform,
they will do anything they can to stop them. Media today can be viewed
in biological terms as an apex predator which kills everything in the
rest of the ecosystem and is full of viruses.

When we say we want media to be organic what we mean is that we want the
media platform itself to replicate. Just as each new tree or squirrel in
a forest really is a whole new instance of “tree” or “squirrel”, with no
central entity controlling them, we want each new instance of our system
to be self-contained. We want it to be able to replicate itself right
where it stands, with no outside input from some central system of any
kind. This is only possible because of the waste of the existing
industrial system: all the materials needed for advanced information
technology are sitting in trash bins, dumpsters, closets, and landfills
within walking distance of wherever you are reading this right now. All
you need to build a whole new media ecosystem from scratch is
information: the information required to gather the people and materials
required to build it. If the system you build tells people how to do
this, it can freely replicate across the whole world without any central
infrastructure.

It is worth noting that building this is hard. Modern digital media
technology is designed by hostile engineers to be as hard as possible to
fix, modify, or use for anything other than consuming advertising for a
few months before it goes to the landfill. Those machines are built by
vast teams of well funded groups with extremely specialized technical
skills. It will take a concerted research effort to fully replace the
existing information technology system with a free one built from trash.
In a later chapter, I will discuss how we can do this by using a
different system architecture in which the purpose of the whole system
is displaying of a specific class of documents based on the software
presented here. But for the time being, in order to launch our new media
system, we will rely on existing off the shelf hardware which is still
part of the consumer system but not the main commercial
advertising-driven part.

This book is therefore doing two things in regards to launching this
system. It is launching a new social media platform based on using the
Raspberry Pi as a local web server used over local wifi networks, and it
is laying the conceptual framework for building a whole new information
technology system from the ground up on new principles. Just as
technology people in the existing system refer to a “technology stack”
we are building a whole new “stack” in the sense of a collection of
technologies which are all related by a chain of increasing or
decreasing abstraction or proximity to the user which work together to
make our system work. In this work, we describe the whole stack. We
launch fully functioning software and hardware for parts of it, and
describe how we will build the other parts that require more work.

The most important part of the current project presented here is that it
work for its purpose which will support the rest of the development.
This means that the technology has to work to distribute new technology
of all kinds built from trash which people need or want, which can be
freely replicated. We use this partially consumption driven media system
to launch self-replicating media systems which really are built from
trash as a demonstration. Our metric of success will be how this
self-replicating media technology replicates and evolves. If we can make
it replicate by making things people want, and make it evolve by
creating a strong incentive for people to improve it, the system will
naturally evolve into the one we need, which no longer requires any
input from the mine-based system to function anymore.

Just as a relatively small number of people a few hundred years ago
sending each other letters built the basis of the current explosion of
technology which led to the existing world order, we believe that a
small number of people with new ideas today can build a much faster
explosion of information which consumes the existing world of
consumption and replaces it with locally closed loops of material in a
single generation. We also believe that this is of the utmost importance
to do as quickly as possible. The existing system is killing us. It is
destroying the natural world, needs constant warfare to function, and is
increasingly driving anyone outside the technocratic elite into extreme
poverty.

So how do we actually build this “organic media”? We start by looking at
living systems, both individual organisms and larger systems like
forests. The most fundamental thing life does is replicate. This will
probably get tedious for the reader, but replication is the thing this
work will come back to with relentless repetition but that relentless
repetition of replication is precisely what makes life work. A living
system is a system of things which all also replicate. Living systems
replicate over all scales: forests replicate, but so does the RNA and
DNA in each cell of each organism in the forest! We will also build our
systems this way: many components make up systems from tiny scraps of
code or single cutouts of cardboard up through whole vast industrial
fabrication systems, and we want *all* of them replicating. Again this
is in direct contrast to the existing system in which small parts like
shared memes on a platform are supposed to replicate but the company
itself is designed around non-replication.

Another property of life is that it is an independently evolving thing.
Because organisms have an independent life, they can change in much more
unpredictable ways than centrally controlled systems like a large
corporation, government or non profit(this includes open source software
projects with a central code base that all instances are copied from).

Finally, all life dies. In order for life to work we need the cycle of
death to be natural. Just as fungi in a forest turn logs into soil we
need the destruction of all things in our system to be natural. This is
again in direct contrast to the existing system in which all media is
built out of a company which is designed to grow forever and never die.

In order to build our platform then we want to write down a set of rules
which will guide all of our work. These are nine rules:

**Everything replicates.** This is the most fundamental law. It is what
makes life alive. And it is what makes media organic rather than viral
or parasitic. This means that all our software contains code to
replicate itself without any reference to a central code repository. The
code on a server in a coffee shop can directly replicate to the laptop
or phone of every person in that coffee shop with no connection to the
rest of the Internet at all. All our hardware is built into some kind of
media which describes its replication.

**Everything evolves.** All things can be edited by all users. To be in
contact with a thing, be it a file or a physical machine is to have the
power to alter that thing totally. There are no “users” or “engineers”
in the sense used today. Some people will choose to edit things more
than others but everyone *can* edit all things.

**Everything dies.** All things can be deleted or destroyed by all
people. This is particularly important for files. Much of the power
structure we are trying to destroy rests on information we are not
allowed to destroy, from the intrusive and parasitic industry of buying
and selling personal data through the constant advertising we are not
allowed to turn off. Also, in order to be able to stop harmful
information, we empower every single user with no exception to be able
to delete every single piece of information they come into contact with,
with no exceptions. This is less destructive than it sounds. Because our
network is all physically local, no central bad actor can wipe out the
whole network. If all networking is at the level of a wifi network, and
they are all constantly being destroyed and rebuilt anyway, the cost of
universal destructive power is outweighed by the benefit of people being
able to stop bad information without any appeal to authority.

**No property.** As discussed in the previous chapter, the idea of
property is not compatible with a civilization based on
self-replication. Since the idea of property fails at scale in a
replication society, and since our goal is to scale, we dispense with it
immediately and build infrastructure which not only has no intellectual
property but where the physical web servers are not owned by anyone.
Initially we will have to spend money to buy parts to build them, but as
soon as they are built we will release them to whoever we think will get
the most use from them, along with instructions for them to do the same,
passing all infrastructure along to wherever it gets the most use.
Building network infrastructure without property for the benefit of our
communities means that our incentives are now to find whoever has the
most need, identifying their needs, and using our technology to serve
those needs and fast and directly as possible. If people benefit from
the systems, they will naturally be able to replicate, which will
further replicate the non-property technology. Initially this means
building Raspberry Pi based web servers and giving them away to the
people with the greatest need.

**No money.** This is connected to the rule against property. Initially
of course we will need to spend money to buy parts, and will need to
have users make money to support their near-term survival. But as we
scale up and get more and more basic needs satisfied by technology built
from trash, we want to have the elimination of money be the direction we
are headed from the start. This is not as far fetched as it sounds. As
will be discussed in the next section, barter will be an incredibly
powerful tool for scaling. Our network can provide huge benefit to very
powerful and wealthy people, and if our people with the most need are
dispensing this benefit, we will be able to barter the things we need to
scale directly. When our network helps a business with a lot of unused
space to make money, they can let us use their space. When a business
person makes connections using our network which make them money,
letting us scale our software up on some of their servers will make
economic sense to them. We will be able to barter our value as network
builders into the things we need for personal survival like places to
sleep and food but also the things we need to scale our technology like
access to labs and machines.

**No mining.** Our long term goal is the global elimination of all
mining. This includes the whole natural resource extraction industry
such as oil and gas as well. This cannot happen overnight, but we don’t
need it to. Every single mined component we replace with one from a
dumpster or landfill takes a little bit of energy and power out of the
mining system. if we can remove power from them in a way which
self-replicates, our system will simply consume theirs, and mining will
be eliminated in a generation.

**Everything is physical.** This is almost a circular statement. What
does it mean for a thing to be “not physical”? This is a statement of
belief. We *believe* that the idea of information which
is not physical is meaningless. All information has a physical
manifestation, be it charge on a transistor or bumps on a CD. This law
is important as a vocal rejection of any theory of how machines works
which states that information or data can exist independently of its
physical existence.

**Everything is recursive.** One of the most notable properties of life
is its constant self-referencing. Billions of DNA strands in each
individual body of a large organism all contain a whole copy of the
information required to replicate the organism. We see information which
points to information which points to information. Life is very
self-referential and involves in an abstract sense functions which call
themselves constantly. RNA stores instructions to make molecules which
replicate RNA, and so on. This law is to remind us as creators of
technology to be *constantly* thinking of ways to make things point back
to themselves to replicate.

**Everything is fractal.** This is another property of living systems
that we take for granted but which we either ignore or make very crude
imitations of presently. Centralized systems of control create
technologies which are flat in scale: we build microchips with nanometer
precision across millions of nanometers(mm) of scale and so on. In
contrast, living systems are fractal in scale such the scale of “error”
required to cause catastrophic failure scales with the size of the
system. We assume that patterns will repeat again and again at different
scales, and expect that our technologies only need to be precise at the
correct scale for any given sub-system. This has very specific
implications for fabrication which will be explored elsewhere, but as a
law we mean that we must simply always have ideas of the fractal nature
of living systems in our minds as we create new things in our new
trash-based civilization.

With our goals and laws of operation stated, we are now finally ready to
delve into more detail into what we are actually constructing with this
work. This is a local network based on a web server loaded on a
Raspberry Pi. The Raspberry Pi is a computer on a circuit board about
the size of a deck of cards which typically costs about \$50. It needs
some peripherals including a screen, keyboard, mouse, battery, and
memory card, all of which makes it about \$200 for a nice, easy-to-use,
portable and self-contained system. It only requires a few commands
which are easily copy/pasted to install the whole functioning Geometron
system on a new Raspberry Pi. It is also modular, and if portability is
not needed it can plug into the wall, borrow a keyboard from another
system temporarily, and display on a TV, making a non-portable system
cost just the value of the board(\$50).

It is also important to note that this is all modular, easy to buy from
many sources, and involves parts many people already have lying around.
The Raspberry Pi is widely marketed as a hobby tool and a STEM education
tool, but its use case is not always clear. Therefore a large number of
people own them but do not use them. They are often sitting in drawers
in someones home office or a under-used maker space gathering dust. If
we have a use for them and can provide useful services to people it
should be possible to directly barter with people who want to support
our network who will be willing to donate the Pi boards to our network,
where they will become non-property and be distributed to those in need.

The actual software we run on the Pi is what is described in the bulk of
this book. It is all designed to run in a web browser. Any web browser.
So if a Raspberry Pi running the Geometron server software is on a wifi
network, all the programs and documents on it can be read, used, edited,
replicated and deleted by anyone connecting to that wifi network on any
device be it a phone, laptop, tablet, or another Raspberry Pi. 

We must also note an important condition for the pi to be a non-property
computer. In order for the pi to be able to freely be shared among the
people, it cannot have any personal data on it which causes someone loss
if it is read by another person. That means we must never log into
private networks like gmail, facebook, or more sensitive things like
bank accounts ever on the system. In order for a free and open system
without property to function, it must be kept separate from the property
based networks. This media platform exists for the sole purpose of free
sharing of documents. Any document we do not wish to share we do not put
on it.

Also, there are no “users” on this network. This is a network of
documents, not users. There are no logins, no passwords, and no
databases. User data is not harvested for profit because we simply do
not generate the type of information which is considered “user data” in
the existing systems.

We take as an axiom in the development of this system that documents
intended for free sharing are of greater value than private documents,
and that the network effect as the universe of non-property documents
grows will exponentially increase their value to people until our
network out-replicates the existing ones.

This book itself is organic media. It is composed of sets of documents which include programs which copy all the other documents and themselves.  The human readable documents like the one you're reading right now describe how to replicate the whole system: documents, servers, people, customs and methods, off grid power, and physical media.  In constructing these sets of media we are constantly aware of the Law stated above that everything must be recursive.  That is, we want all media to point back to all the rest of the set of media in some way.  This book points to making media which points to web pages which host the book as well as directions to physical network nodes which have more physical media which hosts more documents which describe replication and so on and so on.  

This book is the second edition and is currently entirely made of electronic files hosted on computers.  The history of this book as well as its charted future will all be documented in the last chapter of this edition.  This will include converting this second edition into a hard copy which can be sold at the print on demand site Lulu.com as well as a free .pdf to print and bind yourself.   


[Next Chapter: The Pibrary](scrolls/pibrary.md)