## [home](scrolls/home)


# Civilizations

Dig it up, set it on fire, and bury it. Our civilization is an
ever-accelerating destructive flow of material from mine to landfill.
This work is based on the idea that we can do better. Much better! We
have dug such a vast array of useful minerals up in the last few hundred
years and carried out such fantastic transformations on them into useful
materials that we now have the opportunity to build a whole new
civilization with a completely different structure than the one we
presently inhabit.

Our current industrial system is a tripod resting on these three legs:
money, mining and property. These ideas make up a philosophical
framework for understanding and building our world which is failing at
an ever-accelerating rate. In order to build a new civilization, we must
study in detail the structure of the existing one.

Money as an idea is so integrated into our world view that it is very
hard to even see what it is. At its philosophical core, the idea of
money is that there is a property we call “value” which can be denoted
by a number. This is considered so obviously true by defenders of the
existing economic system that when challenged, they simply re-state
repeatedly the basic ideas immediately assuming that any system not
based on money is just the same set of ideas re-arranged. That is,
people will argue that doing away with money will simply replace selling
a things with a certain “value” denote by prices with trading things to
which such a value can also be assigned, but just in a much more
inconvenient way(barter). Similarly, the defenders of the idea of money
will argue that “storing value” is an important task, again assuming
that some kind of thing called “value” can be measured with numbers and
that doing this all-important value storing will simply have to be done
with vaults of metal if we dispense with money.

But this monetary way of thinking does not take into account the
possibility that the value of a thing might multiply by replication or
that value can be created from nothing. As long as everyone in society
is exchanging value along this stream from landfill to mine, we can use
the numbers we call “money” to roughly create an equivalent to the main
type of value, which is physical material. We can measure how much gold
or cobalt or salt we have, and money lets us transform value from one of
these physical things to another, easily trading lithium for silver or
oil for aluminum.

Furthermore, of course, there is labor. In the labor theory of value,
again, money is used to assign some fixed value to a certain amount of
“work” people do to produce a thing. One can superficially dispense with
money but as long as we accept that value comes from how many hours an
actual worker one does some type of task, we are just shuffling the
details around but preserving the structure. But what of automation? And
what of other forms of even more drastic increases in efficiency which
are possible with information technology? Again, once we allow for full
automation and many orders of magnitude increases in efficiency, we find
that there is no way to create a value system using numbers which
actually describes reality as we experience it in an information
economy. Numerous band aids have been proposed, but if we project
forward to more and more automation and further increases in efficiency
we see that we have to re-evaluate the whole labor theory of “value”
along with every other theory of value we hold as a truth today. The
problem, again, is that using numbers to denote value simply will never
be compatible with the new civilization we must now build in order to
survive.

What happens when we create value from something we have an effectively
infinite amount of but which we only have a finite need for? What if,
for instance, I live near a landfill with a vast store of plastic and
electronic trash, and I want to build a small factory which converts
plastic trash into useful furniture for direct use near the material I
have. Suppose the electronics trash has all the material I need to build
this fully automated factory, and that the material needed to create so
much great furniture that no one near me ever has to buy furniture
again, that they can get custom high quality furniture which can be
repaired indefinitely without even tapping too deeply into the vast
store of plastic trash available directly in our community. This act of
creation brings a thing of great value into being from nothing but
information. In this situation, money fails. As long as we rely on money
to denote and store value, everyone creating value from nothing has to
either get someone in the money-creating business to create currency
specifically for them or to do that themselves as they create.

But the more creative our new industrial processes are, the more
catastrophically the money system fails. If I share the information on
how to build the thing with the rest of the world, in principle the
equivalent of trillions of dollars of value can be created from nothing.

This failure is not hypothetical. Creating value from nothing which can
self-replicate freely is precisely what software does. Software produces
things of great value with no material input needed at all, and is able
to almost instantly replicate to the whole of humanity. If someone can
create almost infinite value with no input of labor, energy or
materials(after the initial creation process), what does that imply for
the rest of the people? We are seeing this every day. Every city in the
world right now is witnessing a violent takeover by the replicators.
Those who can replicate their products infinitely for free include the
media industry, marketing, software, finance, and all the numerous
information based businesses which make up those business ecosystems. We
are finding that at an ever-accelerating rate all the wealth in our
society is being transferred from people who produce things that do not
replicate, like physical goods or physical labor to the replicators.

The purpose of the work here is to show that there is another way. We
can create an information based economy made up of self-replicating
information which reproduces things of value which cannot be added up
using numbers. This is not some crude replacement for money using
barter, but rather a whole new approach to everything: we will have to
build a new way of thinking about machines, society, mathematics, and
philosophy. Just as the existing system is based at its deepest level on
numbers, we propose basing our entire civilization on geometry.
Geometron is a universal geometric language which we can use to express
the self-replicating information we will need to build this new
civilization.

The second leg of our tripod of civilization is property. As with money,
the idea of property is very difficult to examine as it is so deeply
woven into the fabric of everything we do. The world view we are taught
in school and at home is that just as everything has a price that
everything is owned by someone. In some cases that ownership might be
the state or even some type of “common property” but all things are in
some way property. In the dominant ideology of our time, air and water
are property, the land is property, the genes in our DNA patented by the
drug companies are property, and even these words I am typing are
property.

Again, as with money, we have to examine how this idea is going to fail
more and more catastrophically as we evolve into a civilization based on
the replication of technology from trash rather than consumption of
mined materials using labor. In many ways the purpose of property is to
inhibit replication. In the case of intellectual property this is in
fact its *only* purpose. But even for physical property like land, the
whole idea is that if I “own” land the real purpose of that ownership is
to make sure someone else does not own it.

The idea of property makes sense when we are all competing for resources
we have to dig up out of the ground. If I dig up 1 ton of silver it
means you can’t and vice versa. We are all in competition to be the
owner of that silver. If you are 1000 pounds of silver richer, I’m 1000
pounds of silver poorer. But we have to see that with an informational
economy based on trash as the main input this is no longer the case.

If I consume a ton of trash from a landfill into useful things, we have
to recognize that that ton of trash has a negative value, which changes
completely what it means to use it to make things. If I consume 1000
pounds of oil to make a plastic part, that oil has a cost we now measure
in money I have to spend to buy the oil. But if I consume that from a
landfill, the cost is negative! Regardless of what I make from the
plastic, simply having it be something useful at all is of value. In our
existing consumer economy we all actually have to spend money to dispose
of waste. So an economy built entirely on waste streams breaks the whole
idea of property up. If I have a pile of trash on my land and you take
it away that has value to me and also to you. We are no longer in
competition in this relationship–the more trash you take the more
benefit I get but also the more you get.

We must also recognize how an economy based on the replication of
technology from trash using free information technology changes the
incentives in regards to intellectual property. If I create a new
technology now and release it into the world, the only way for me to
make money on it is to retain some control, which is now expressed by
means of the property system. But if I create a new technology from
trash which does something useful, and it’s intended to only be used
locally, the value proposition changes. I use local materials to make a
thing and directly benefit from it. When I share it with you, you also
do that, but if you then improve upon it and release it back into the
network, I can immediately benefit from the improvement.

If we build feedback loops across a global network we can get
exponential speedups of technological development. What this means is
that if I am a technology creator and share my creations freely, the
thing I create can be instantly transformed into a thing co-created by a
global community which is vastly superior to what I would have made
alone. If my only goal in building technology is to directly convert the
trash in my physical environment into useful things, my choices in
regards to how I relate to the rest of the world will be based on trying
to do that better and better. If the more I share the more this happens,
often with what I make being totally replaced by something much better,
my incentives undergo a radical shift. What I now want more than making
a good thing and controlling it is making a thing which entices others
to improve it. Again, as with money, we find that the idea of property
inhibits us from doing what we need to do to build this new
civilization.

The third leg of our tripod is mining. This is perhaps the most
fundamental. The entire basis of our long strange trip from stone tools
to bronze to iron to steel to silicon and so on is based on mining. We
need mines to get the materials to make things. In order to make complex
things with many materials, we need a global system which maintains
physical control over all those mines using the system of property and
the governments which uphold that property. We also need a global supply
chain again based on stability of governments and large institutions to
maintain the constant global flow of goods. In order for our current
system to work, every individual element from oil to lithium to uranium
must be transported to everyplace on Earth. Conversely, every piece of
land with a resource on it will under the current system be pressured to
extract that resource and push it out into the global economy.

Under the mining regime, every single type of mine is a choke point to
the whole global system. This regime is inherently conservative: any
threat to any part of it will make the whole system fail, harming
everyone who relies on it which is presently everyone. In order to keep
the system running, therefore, a constant global regime of military
force is required. One cannot have a mining based civilization without
military empires to control the large scale flow of materials.

And again as with money and property we have to examine how the system
of mining affects our relations with our fellow people. As long as value
all comes from a mine, we are all in competition at some level for the
mines products. Every so-called “developing” nation will be forced by
the dominant powers to extract all their resources to benefit someone
else since all the nations are in competition to benefit from those
resources.

But when we build everything in our civilization from the trash of the
old world this situation completely changes. My motivation as a producer
of technology is now to turn trash into things of value as much as
possible. If you are thousands of miles away, and we never exchange any
physical goods, just information, my incentive is now to have you
replicate the trash technology as much as possible. This is for several
reasons. First, there is the same reason as stated above in the
discussion of property: the network effect. The more people copy my
technology the better it will get, and the more comfortable my own life
will become. But also, if we build a society which abolishes the mine,
as long as other people are mining they will pose a threat to us. As
long as anyone in the world bases their civilization on mining, they
will need to build empires and dominate large masses of land in order to
keep mining. So if I want to not be invaded by a mine-based empire it is
in my best interest to help every other place on Earth develop the same
technology in order to also prevent the violence of the mine from
destroying what we build.

In today’s world *every* single useful material we need for advanced
technology has been pretty evenly distributed to every corner of the
globe. This is totally unprecedented! There is nothing in history even
remotely similar to the situation we find ourselves in today. People do
not seem to have really grasped how fundamental and irreversible this
is. Even if humanity died out tomorrow and were replaced by evolved
crows in 100 million years, the distribution of rare minerals around the
globe will remain. We will never again have to discover from scratch how
to find and extract materials like cobalt or tantalum. We not only have
all the materials needed to build an advanced technological civilization
from scratch, those materials are already in a very organized form
specifically designed to be useful. Aluminum has already been extracted
from bauxite, iron has been smelted into steel, silicon purified into
wafers of unimaginable perfection and so on.

Examining all three of these legs(money, property and mining) it should
now be clear that these ways of thinking fall apart when we build all of
our technology from trash instead of mined materials. It is my intent in
this work to build a framework for creating this new world. To do this,
we will need to build up a whole world of thought and action from
scratch. The most fundamental focus of this new world is replication. We
study how media replicates, how machines replicate, how software and
hardware replicate, how whole systems replicate, and how pure
information replicates.

We also take as an axiom that geometric thinking is more fundamental
than numerical. This is because geometry is what we use to actually make
things. From buildings to microchips to injection molded plastic
enclosures, all technology is essentially a geometric construction of
one kind or another. So if we are interested in building media the sole
purpose of which is to replicate technology effectively, we find that
geometry is the most fundamental form of mathematical thinking. As with
the existing system of thought we currently live in, we will need to
delve deeply into our most fundamental assumptions of how the world
works. But now rather than trying to find some abstract truth, as the
mathematicians of the early 20th century did, we build up a system of
thought based on outcome: that which freely replicates useful things
from trash is the goal, whatever that turns out to be. This will lead to
re-evaluating how we think about machines and mathematical philosophy,
replacing the theories of “computers” with ideas about geometric
machines to print symbols.

One final note to make about this geometric world view. As with all our
mathematics in this new civilization, our goal is replication, not
finding some higher truth. This means that geometry is all based on its
meaning to humans. Even if the meaning is in the angle of a turbine
blade which communicates a different level of air movement in an air
conditioner, it is this meaning we care about, not some abstract theorem
to prove or algorithm to own. We therefore take language and symbols to
be the most fundamental elements of which our Universe is constructed.
We accept that whatever we may think or do, the “real” universe is
separated from our minds by a veil of language we can never fully see
clearly through. Reductionist science has made the mistake of ignoring
this veil and focusing on a hypothetical “objective reality”. Whether or
not this is a permanent intellectual dead end is of no interest to us
here. We want results, fast. We want a better civilization in our
lifetimes. And to do that we build up a new way of thinking about
information where our desire to provide direct value to people and
replicating that to as many people as possible is our most fundamental
axiom.

We call this geometric system of value, this geometric meta-langauge,
Geometron. This is the Book of Geometron, which describes how to
replicate the whole system.


[Next Chapter: Organic Media](scrolls/organicmedia.md)
