## [Home](scrolls/home)

# Full Stack Geometron

In spite of its philosophical intent, the media infrastructure presented
here is all based on off-the-shelf information technology which
ultimately comes from mines. We must state clearly, however, that our
desire is to build a media system which requires no further input of
mined materials to function. That is to say, all the media hardware we
use should be based on waste streams from the existing system. This
means it can be built on discarded and broken hardware, and then as that
hardware continues to disintegrate over time, that it has the means to
continue to repair and evolve it so that the constituent atoms and
molecules and deep structures form the basis of a stable technology
which can exist in equilibrium with the local ecosystem. To build this
new type of media, we need to first be clear on what the goals are, then
sketch out how this might be done, create a path forward for developing
this, and then take action to set in motion the series of events which
will cause this system to come into being.

When media does not have “users” and “data” as in consumer media, but is
simply a network for hosting self-replicating documents, this radically
alters some fundamental assumptions about how media works. Also, when we
use the waste streams of the existing wasteful system, the basic
mathematics of the situation is altered by the sheer astronomical scale
at which waste media hardware is currently produced. If we combine the
designed-to-fail phones with the designed-to-fail laptops, and tv’s and
so on, and then combine on top of that all the useless junk in the
so-called “internet of things” which is currently being accelerated, the
number of physical objects we can incorporate into our new media
ecosystem is absolutely staggering. It is difficult to calculate the
numbers and it is a moving target anyway, but it seems clear that we can
easily build a system with at least a 10 to 1 ratio of
recently-discarded media hardware to people, for every single person on
this planet. That is to say, we can conservatively estimate that we have
available a reservoir of 100 billion mostly-intact media devices to
distribute among a projected population of 10 billion people. Less
conservatively, and taking some of the marketing noise from Silicon
Valley at face value, we might be looking at more like 100 or 1000 media
devices per person, especially if we find ways to dig out a large number
of more trashed older systems.

In a world with many media devices per person, and no private “user
data” or property, we can build systems of ubiquitous community media
rather than personal media devices(the primary function of which is to
maximize waste, and to surveil and control people). What does this look
like? To get a feel for how this could look we recall the discussion
earlier in this book about the Street Network, and the power of physical
places. Places with significance, such as cross roads, major cultural
centers, community centers, parks, fords, bridges, tunnels, libraries
and so on can all host ubiquitous organic media.

If I want a document in a place other than where I was reading and
editing it before, I simply replicate that document from one network
node to the next. Documents can flow from one place to another, along
with people. But the physical infrastructure of the media does *not*
need to be moved from one place to another. This is a very radical
departure from existing media systems, and it alters our design
constraints on hardware dramatically. Perhaps the two most powerful
effects of this difference on design is on portability and redundancy.
If we are using streams of trash to build things, and are accumulating
this material in central physical network nodes, we can have a very high
level of hardware redundancy. In mine based systems, any redundancy
means more money and more mining and is avoided at all cost, with the
smallest amount of material in the smallest space. When devices are all
attached to individual persons, they must be as small as possible, and
less material is also always sought out. But when we are absorbing
material which was a liability to society, the more of it we absorb the
better. So we can build whole structures of stitched together screens
for purely aesthetic purposes which never would have made sense in the
old system. Also, we can build systems that just use a single component
from something and let the rest of it sit there waiting to be absorbed
into some future project, but unused for the time being.

Removing portability as a design goal makes a lot of design tasks much
easier. Perhaps the most powerful consequence of this shift is with
electrical power. Today’s media devices all either take power from a
wall socket or from a battery which is charged via a wall socket.
Batteries are always pushed right up to the physical limits of light
weight and high energy density. But if we replace this with static media
infrastructure, batteries can be replaced by hybrid power cells which
store energy by several means, and take up as much space as the
materials used happen to need. We need a system for converting all the
materials in wasted batteries today into working batteries. This is not
“recycling” in the existing centralized sense, with mass production
mirroring the process of mine-based production. Like everything in our
new civilization, it is a craft mode of production, in which anyone
anywhere in the world can use skills transmitted via the network to
directly convert waste batteries into cells in a modular power pack
which can be used to run all of our electrical devices. Again, we note
that there is no reason based on the fundamental physics and chemistry
of the system that this is not possible or indeed even easy. It is just
not done today due to the broken system based on money, mining and
property we are forced to work with in modern society.

In addition to re-designing the whole power storage system of our media,
we need to address power generation itself. In order to eliminate mining
and the control of empires, we need power generation which is based
entirely on trash, and is totally local. The proposed civilization here
will use less than 1 100th of the power of existing civilization by
removing wasted efforts. *Most* power today is used to do pointless
activities, from driving around in circles to keeping lights on in giant
buildings where people do pointless things all day. A huge fraction of
this is also based on our system of property which forces people to
ignore weather, seasons, and natural geography and live places that make
no sense to live based on the violence of the state and property. If we
ignore this and build a new civilization not tied to property, much of
the energy we waste on huge megacities in unsustainable locations can be
terminated as we abandon those cities(Phoenix Arizona should probably
have a population of under 1000 people). Micropower can be generated by
converting all the motors found in broken electrical devices into power
generators, and used for direct mechanical power generation, from wind,
water, and heat engines run on the sun. Photovoltaics and wind as they
are used today are not of interest, as they rely on mine waste just like
coal, nuclear and oil. No mining means no mining. And that means we will
only build where we can get some power from the natural world above
ground.

Another consequence of non-portable media is that we can scale the
displays way up. In the chapter of this book on Action Geometry, we
describe a Trash Camp in which large modular structures are built for
both shelters and industrial production infrastructure. Trash camps like
this which accumulate a large amount of material can have essentially
all surfaces turn into screens as wasted screens pile up from the old
system. Some screens might even be dead, and just used as a flat
structural element which blocks rain water. But if we can build a
modular system for integrating screens into our media, and also build
out the optics technology to do large scale projection on walls and
other large surfaces, we can have truly ubiquitous displays if we want
to.

In general, we also are always focusing on increasing modularity so that
components which are repurposed from old broken technology have the
maximum possible utility. In many cases, this will mean sacrificing the
*majority* of the elements of a piece of technology and just making use
of one component. We can then, over time, as our technology improves,
find ways to repeat this with other components. But initially we will
find that in many cases something like a whole smart phone is being
converted to just a single modular device, say an accelerometer or a
touch sensor. In order to facilitate this kind of modular technology, we
need to develop a hybrid interconnect technology in which we build up
fabrication at the millimeter scale, constructing again by craft
production components which break out the electrical contacts in a
simple, well-documented way from needed components to the outside world.
In some cases we can build these interconnects on the existing standards
like USB, but in many cases these standards are designed to make low
quality stuff that fails quickly and we will need to spend considerable
research efforts on building more robust standards. Much more robust
standards will be possible when we again use the principles that larger
size and redundancy are now acceptable. Without minimization of material
use and size, contacts can be designed which are much more robust than
the aggressively miniaturized connectors used by consumer technology.

When our network is primarily used to share documents, rather than
real-time surveillance, manipulation and control, it also opens up some
new possibilities in terms of information transport protocols. The
Street Network is going to create a network of travelers on the physical
networks of the world: truckers, hitchhikers, camper dwellers, and
wanderers of all sorts. If we don’t need documents moved instantly, this
physical network can be used to transport physical storage media,
creating a flow of information comparable to the trunk lines used to run
the Internet today. This network protocol is a social one rather than a
technical one. Rather than information in packets being directed to
numerical addresses of machines, we have documents being sent from one
community of actual people to another. This makes the protocol sound
like mail, but it is not. Mail is still based on the unique address of
an individual person or organization. The network we are building is not
based on property or individuals, but on communities and on
self-replication of information. Documents will flow to where they are
wanted, and actual humans will make choices on the fly about what that
looks like.

In building a new type of media infrastructure, we must also consider
the fundamental issues of what our machines are designed to do. These
are not computers. We are building machines to edit, replicate, and read
*documents*. The fundamental operation of a “computer” is arithmetic.
The fundamental operation of our machines is the display of symbols in
the generalized sense discussed in an earlier chapter: any geometry with
meaning. If the only purpose of a machine is to display a document and
interact with it, the whole hardware and software architecture can be
completely different. The toy model of a computer called a Turing
Machine, which does things to numbers based on a program written in
numbers is replaced by a model where a human makes the choice to engage
a machine, requesting that the machine draw a symbol, which it does
based on a program made up of geometric actions and symbols. This is not
a computer! It is Geometron: machines using symbols to make symbols
rather than numbers to make numbers.

In computers, a program is running all the time, and it carries out an
operation on each clock cycle, with well over a billion clock cycles per
second, even when it does nothing. In our machines, no permanent clock
is needed. When we engage with it by clicking, scrolling, typing or
engaging some other sensor, we are carrying out a geometric action which
causes a glyph stored in memory to be drawn. This can have any kind of
time steps, including uneven ones, where we simply want things to be
done in a certain order, and each step takes as long as it takes to do
the geometry. In some cases we will want things to happen fast, but in
general we aim to make these things as simple as possible, so that the
things happening on a nanosecond time scale only relate to saving and
loading large documents to and from memory. When we do nothing, the
machine is also at rest. And it only comes alive and does things in
direct response to our engagement. All software which is not creating a
document, editing one, or replicating one is dispensed with.

The Geometron language can be used to create any of the documents
described here, down to the hardware level. We will have bitmaps be
stored in an Image Stack, which is memory for the sole purpose of
storing sequences of bitmaps. A Geometron Virtual Machine can then be
implemented in hardware by translating sequences of addresses into
geometric actions. These addresses reference a Geometron Hypercube which
is a physical memory component which stores address sequences in each
address. With geometric movements as well as a whole font stored in the
font section of the Hypercube, scrolls can be constructed as just
another Geometron glyph. Reading a book or article or any other kind of
rich text document is then just a matter of drawing a single big
Geometron glyph. This glyph can include layout, graphics, text, and
complex rich text structures in multiple languages. Geometric
constructions combined with access of the aforementioned Image Stack can
be used to construct Maps on our displays. If we can display Maps,
Scrolls, and generic symbols, we can create and edit any document,
making a generalized symbol machine in analog to the generalized
computing machine.

Information is stored in self-replicating media as described in the
Printers chapter: lithography in brass to make stamped copies in
removable silicone films. This information is both written and read out
using old DVD drives for both the laser, the optics, and the positional
control(at about 1 micron to a few cm scale), as well as the spinner to
spin on the silicone coatings and photoresist layers on the polished
brass plates. Information is encoded using the Roctal coding
scheme(octal that rocks). In this scheme, numbers are represented in
binary, with rows of three bits so that each row represents a digit in a
base 8 system. These arrays of bits are arranged in some standard
repeating pattern with added structures for alignment marks. This method
encodes bytecode which can be used to create any of the documents
described here: HTML files, JSON data, Scrolls, Maps, Feeds, Image
Stacks(in base 64 encoding), and Geometron Hypercubes. Hardware which
converts these types of information into symbols can be created as a
physical implementation of the GVM, directly translating sequences of
addresses into sequences of geometric actions either on a display or on
some physical machine. The most fundamental such machine this controls
of course is the writer. The writer writes code onto the brass plate
which represents documents, including the code to write the code. This
plate, after being etched, is used to replicate the information many
times over using soft silicone films with imprints of the brass plate.
These are then read by other people on other Geometron machines, so that
another person can read a set of documents which describe how to build
this whole system from trash other people can find in their physical
location. Having replicated this media system, the next person who joins
can then use their machines to build more self-replicating documents, by
printing out brass plates and then replicating the documents again and
again with one plate. Furthermore, each instance of the system can be
printing in clay at a human readable size, and we can carry out physical
tabletop symbolic interactions by moving printed clay tokens around with
other people. As discussed before, these tokens are themselves
self-replicating media, which can be used to stamp clay to stamp more
clay and so on, replicating without a printer. And, like the microscopic
brass printed information, these tokens which represent elements of sets
are used to replicate the media system by containing all the elements of
the system we need to discuss when talking to someone face to face about
replication.

Numerous challenging details are left out of the discussion in this
chapter, but that doesn’t matter. What is clear now is that the
described system can be built from a physics and engineering standpoint.
If we want it, we can build it. So what is needed now is only to decide
that we want it and that we know how we will exist in relation to it as
it comes into being. If we can do that, and if we can share this desire
widely enough, it all of the technical problems will be solved by
someone. This is the full power of Trash Magic: we seek to replicate the
desire to build everything from trash in both the minds of other people
and in the physical reality of the world around us. If you join in this
mission, and you fully commit to feeling the desire for this world, you
should be able to share that with someone else, and if they can do that,
they can pass it on. If we can spread this desire widely enough, the
materials, skills, energy and time will simply materialize from the mass
efforts of all these people. Building a new civilization without money,
without mining and without property is a lot easier than you think. Now
is the time for us to simply decide to do this, and get on with living
the adventures that this new world will bring about.
