[home](index.html)

[Book of Geometron](scrolls/bookofgeometron.md)

# Chapter 3: The Street Network

### What is the Street Network?

The consumer society we live in today relies on a vast and
well-organized collection of networks to function. There are the
networks which channel freight from one place to another, like trains,
trucks and boats. There are the human transport networks like planes,
personal cars and buses. There are the invisible networks of power based
on who when to school with whom, family connections, or business
connections. And of course there is the global information network
centered on the Internet which connects everyone together by
information.

What we seek to build is the means of replication of trash-based
technology in order to propagate our new civilization built entirely
from trash. This new system will be much more localized than the
existing one. Rather than needing a constant high rate of movement of
very large quantities of physical goods, we plan to build systems which
will ultimately use material directly available in our physical
environment rather than from far away. Even in places with limited
agricultural capacity, I believe that with the superior technology which
we can build using a more organic system that we can build dense food
production and water purification everywhere once we put our minds to
it, making almost all large scale movement of goods un-needed. We will
still move goods and people, but more by choice than necessity for
personal reasons. When globalization does not force everyplace to be
identical, travel can become an adventure again!

Part of the ideology of the existing Internet-based culture is that
place no longer matters. People appear on a teleconference or send an
email and no one cares where they are. People arrive for a meeting in a
business hotel or conference center and it is identical to every other
place in the world. The ideological basis of the Geometron Street
Network is that place *does* matter and *should*matter. We reject the
idea of “nowhere”. Everyone is somewhere. Whether you are in a rural
area, a suburb, a big city or a highway rest stop you are always
*somewhere*. Furthermore, that place you are has its own local
geographical logic. It has its own crossroads, its own nodes of power
and connection, whether it is the local pub or coffee shop or the exit
of a subway station. All these little places on the scale of one human
body have real meaning for the people who inhabit that space.

We want an information network based around physical replication of
technology from trash. To stimulate the replication of the Network, we
need it to create value for people who use it and operate it. This value
can be of many kinds: it can directly provide physical goods people
need, it can facilitate business in the monetary economy, it can provide
mutual aid to a community, it can create local social connections, can
build network power for users, and any of these values can be traded for
materials and space needed to continue to expand the network.

The Street Network consists of the people going out and spreading all
this, the web servers we use to do it, and globally visible web pages
which serve as links to connect users to us and our network.

We buy domain names which are linked to a place but not property. We
avoid .com and focus on .org, .net or .xyz domains. We avoid specific
addresses or names of companies. We choose names that describe shared
resources which are public enough that no one is in the position to
claim ownership of the name. This can be the name of a neighborhood or
street, a body of water, a park, or a mobile shared resource like a
mutual aid bus used by people who already do not use property. In the
physical location described by the domain we create and share physical
media which points to the domain. In its simplest form this can just be
a hand written cardboard sign. However, we can also use Geometron to
make various self-replicating physical media which transmit the domain,
such as laser cut spray stencils and the self-replicating clay tokens
described later in this work. We also can fly a black flag of the place
with cut out colored felt sewn on a black square of cloth, which is
described in the Scrolls distributed with the system.

Each domain is hosted on some commercial server for the time being, from
providers such as Dreamhost or Bluehost. Free web hosting can also be
used at 000webhost.com and is recommended if you have no money. The
Geometron software can then be installed on each of these servers
according to the instructions in the next section(and repeated on each
Geoemtron instance in the Scrolls), making it just another identical
instance of the software to what exists on all the local Raspberry Pi
based servers. The primary purpose of these globally visible domains is
to point back to the local server. In its simplest form this is just a
description of when and where you might find the server. Photographs of
the network Operator and their gear can validate the system to passerby.
The Map format described in a later chapter can also be used to
precisely identify physical places where infrastructure can be found.

The deceptively simple structure described above is the Street Network.
We are adding digital media technology to the oldest network in the
world: the physical paths of movement. We will use this to follow all
those paths, from superhighways to ancient footpaths to natural harbors,
just as other ideas have traveled throughout human history. If we find
the most powerful nodes of geography we can build a network of
staggering power with a relatively small number of people initially.

Users
-----

The uses of this network are very different for different people, just
as is the case for the existing global networks like the Internet. In
this section I will discuss some of the different user groups and how
our network can provide value for them.

**Operators.** We are the start of this. Get a Raspeberry Pi and install
the system. Get a domain, install the system and point to your server.
Go forth and share! Ultimately those of us who build and share this
system will form a very powerful network of mendicants. The mendicant
tradition has appeared many times in many places in history. A mendicant
is someone who is totally devoted to their faith(they are generally
religious orders) who renounces wealth and travels with no possessions
asking passerby for donations to support them. This has traditionally
created contradictions, as these orders have a way of gaining power and
becoming anything but poor as they scale up. As our consumer society has
destroyed itself it has driven more and more people into this way of
living against their will. If our network provides vast amounts of value
to people we will find that the most marginalized people of today when
leveraging the power of this new network can barter for not just
survival but to thrive in a new civilization without money, mining or
property.

We follow the laws of Geoemtron listed in the previous chapter as a
guide for building this new world. We teach everyone we meet how this
whole system works, and recruit new people as Operators. Note that the
idea of a mendicant order has strong religious overtones, but that this
is a completely non-denominational order based on the universal language of
geometry. Geometry has a central place in all existing cosmologies, both
ones considered religious and ones considered secular. The work here
presents a way of interacting with the world based on geometry. In some
ways this whole project can be thought of as the start of a free school
for teaching a new kind of geometry. This is a distant descendant then
of the geometry schools of the ancient world. We teach people the whole
system; mathematical philosophy, robotics, code, all kinds of industrial
fabrication, crafts, fashion, whatever we build we teach and share
freely.

Do not misinterpret this idea of the mendicant as a vow of poverty. We
will be more wealthy than anyone currently living in the consumer
society once we scale this Network. We are building a new world in which
no one is poor. By starting from a baseline of people who have nothing
but building better technology than what is presently available in
consumer civilization we start by making sure those who have the least
have everything: free clean water, free good food, free high technology
medicine, free transport, free shelter, free network technology, free
air conditioning and heat etc. If those who have the least have better
stuff than the richest people in today’s world the world of today will
dissolve and be naturally replaced by this new order built from the
waste of the old.

**Traveling kids, hobos, panhandlers, people asking for money or selling
things on the street corner.** A physically local free bulletin board
shared by passerby in a high traffic area can allow people asking for
money who are currently ignored by passerby as just another anonymous
face and cardboard sign a chance to really tell their stories and to
share all that they have to share. When people share their stories they
can become part of the emergent physical community of passerby in a
location where the network node is located. When people view others as
part of their community they not only are more willing to help, they can
have open communication about the best way to help, expanding from just
spare change to more comprehensive mutual aid. Because we clone content
from the local terminal to web pages on globally visible domains linked
to a physical place, which are advertised everywhere in that place,
marginalized people whose only ability to get online is the public
library can use the computers there to get the information they need to
better survive, and ultimately to thrive and build new communities where
they already are. The way a local network can help people is twofold.
First, it is direct, by asking for money and other mutual aid. But by
being physically on location all the time, already with physical
media(cardboard signs), people in a given place can aid the network,
creating value for the other people in the community who are more
resourced, who then no longer view monetary support as “donation”, but
rather as an expense which supports their other business activities.

In order to see the power of this second means of network support of
marginalized people on the street, we have to look more closely at the
network nodes we are building. One of the major types of node is in a
business district of a city where there are both homeless people asking
for money, on the street all day with physical media, and power brokers
who make their living entirely from connections. These people include
venture capitalists, entrepreneurs, lobbyists, consultants, and the rest
of what might be called the “deal-making class”. An example of this
confluence is some of the parks along K-Street in Washington DC. K
Street and adjacent streets is home to a huge homeless population as
well as power brokers whose livelihood depends entirely on connections.
If a physical network were built which facilitated direct communication
between people along K Street, the people who spend the most time
physically on the street can be brokers of information on a network
which can be worth a lot to the people who trade in information.
Physically local information networks can leverage the power of physical
places with very powerful people walking past all the time who normally
never communicate. Connecting these people up can be dangerous. But if
we provide them with value, it can be worth both a lot of money to them
and also potentially something they can barter for giving us space to
live and work nearby. If you facilitate a 10 million dollar deal and the
customer knows you can do it again, the least they can do is give you a
100 dollar gift card to the nicest restaurant in the block. There is no
real upper limit on what an enterprising Network Operator could in
theory make if they learned to really channel information efficiently in
the nodes of global power. And of course we must remember that when
dealing with power brokers their currency is not money. When the people
who currently have the most power in society find themselves dependent
on free open networks, those networks themselves will gain power which
penetrates that of the existing power structures, potentially creating
an existential threat to them. We must take note of this.

The elements of traveler culture which overlap with “van life” are also
key to increasing the network effects of the Street Network. This also
links to trucker networks. People who live their lives on the road can
use this network infrastructure to set up complex networks and markets
in highway rest stops, Walmart parking lots etc. using either wifi
networks in these places or their own hotspots from their phones. These
networks can be of utility to passerby of all kinds, from tourists to
truckers to the workers who keep the places running. Just as existing
global social media networks provide value they can charge money for, a
physically local network can provide value which people will pay for. An
example use case here is a Street Network Operator agreeing to maintain
a backup of and keep posting an advertisement for something a local
entrepreneur is trying to sell to truckers. In exchange for that, they
can get directly compensated in gas, right there in the rest stop,
without money changing hands.

**Food not bombs, street outreach, harm reduction people, mutual aid
workers.** See above. The people who are working to help the most
marginalized members of any given community can better reach that
community if there is a physically local media platform where people can
share information about resources. Documents can be posted which explain
how to get access to resources, when and where resources will be
available, etc. Because the whole system self-replicates, as with Food
Not Bombs, anything which is successful in any given place can be
immediately cloned to other nodes on the network. Food Not Bombs already
has a global network of free and open nodes with no property but a very
recognizable brand identity and set of behaviors and actions. FNB nodes
are generally already linked by networks both online and via people who
travel from one punk house or FNB house to the next. The whole anarchist
network of community houses, FNB’s, anarchist infoshops and bookstores,
really really free markets, free boxes, etc. can form a basis for a
truly free information network carried from house to house and city to
city, running on house wifi networks.

**Business owners in a shopping center.** Every business owner has
neighbors who are also business owners. You already have an informal
network. But installing free digital media infrastructure can provide
huge value by allowing more mutual aid between neighbors of all kinds,
both owners and customers. Tech giants ignore you. They demand monetary
tribute in order to even have your business listed, and then still
refuse to give you an equal footing to the corporate giants which
dominate their platforms. By controlling a local platform in *your*
shopping center, you can provide value to customers with articles they
write and share with one another which brings them in(just as
advertising-supported media has interesting content to get people to
look at ads). And then this medium can have much more than just the ads
you would get from a Big Tech platform. You can post really detailed
information about everything you do with no restrictions on length, and
share across the shopping center. If you own a karate school next to a
dentist, the bored people in the waiting room can read about the history
of karate right next to a detailed schedule of your class offerings. And
when parents wait for their kids to get out of karate class they can be
reading about clean gums in an article written by the dentist. Big Tech
doesn’t care about you. If you build your own network, you can center it
right where it belongs: on the people actually using it, rather than a
few oligarchs in San Francisco.

**Coffee shop owners.** Building a network in a coffee shop on the wifi
network which requires purchase to use and which has a time limit can
create a huge amount of added business for any local business owner. It
also builds community. So coffee shop owners who find themselves with a
full shop of laptop drones with headphones on who work for hours, or get
kicked out and do the same thing somewhere else can instead find
themselves the brokers in a very powerful information network. Much of
the commerce of the world is now code written in coffee shops on
laptops. Creating physically local networks around these already
existing groups can create huge power for the users which then benefits
the people who set up the infrastructure(again, just like existing
centralized social media platforms.)

**Web developers.** We need web developers(people who can write HTML and
JavaScript code) to be constantly writing more and better software in
order to make Geometron a success. Developers who work all day in coffee
shops or any other shared space like a co-working space or pub can have
a social network based on both co-developing applications useful to all
and sharing other resources. Developers will use the resource of the
Street Network terminal/server on the local network in the same basic
way as others: they can share their resumes, links to pages of personal
projects. Developers are key to the whole system. We must recruit
developers with this book who will rewrite all the code and also the
book, replicating the whole system. The faster our network can get
developers into the swarm, the faster the code itself will improve.
Developers are key!! Developers create servers to share into the
network. I now ask the reader to look up “steve balmer developers” on
YouTube.

**Power brokers.** Venture capitalists, financiers, entrepreneurs,
deal-makers of all kinds, lobbyists, politicians. Your network is your
power. Geography matters. Build a network in the lobby. Post things on
street nodes, build your network, build your power, build your literal
street cred. Deal flow. Deal flow the likes of which you have never
seen. Leverage the power of the physical street!

**Crafters, makers, jewelers, artists.** An alternative to Etsy, street
vending, or being in a shop. Post your stuff to the local networks. This
is much more free and long form than existing platforms, you can post
images, descriptions, contact info, times and places when you’ll be in a
place. This can be way easier than other sales channels for arts and
crafts. You can say when and where you’ll be at a place, post a link for
contact, and then show up in the network node like a coffee shop to make
the physical exchange. In many cases, because the network is physical
and local, there will be barter opportunities as well as direct sales. A
barter economy can develop where people donate materials you use for
your crafts as part of how they pay for the finished product. Removing
shipping or transport costs by dealing directly in a physical location
removes friction from the market, amplifying dramatically the power of
the market, especially for crafts which involve physically bulky
objects. For instance, people can bring in motors and properly prepared
plastic sheets and cardboard, as well as rolls and rolls of duct tape,
and we can exchange finished products built from these materials and
tools, as well as free food, drinks, and supplies, creating a market
economy without money as well as without formal business
structures(making it easier for marginalized people to participate).

**Any labor pool of gig economy workers focused on a specific geographic
location.** One of the most obvious of these is the drivers who
presently drive for the major rideshare apps who all congregate at the
airport to pick passengers up in the same exact place, and yet all of it
is currently coordinated via the apps(unless you do the cab line). The
rideshares apps have proven that cities will ignore illegal cabs if
they’re done at scale. It would be straightforward for a small team of
Network Operators to run a server which replicates to a page which is
advertised around, something like a domain of yourairportnamerides.xyz,
which tells users how to log onto the wifi network created by an
Operator’s hotspot near the pickup zone and with a link on the page to
the local network address of the server. All all this IT is doing is
directing customers to a dispatcher who manages the drivers over a
simple app shared by the collective. The whole network is run by a team
of about 2-4 people. One person might be a developer, who creates the
app to manage all the drivers and post messages from dispatch. Another
person is all marketing, putting up the relevant information in the
right places to get seen by travelers but not stopped by the rideshare
apps, airport authorities, or the cab companies. Riders will never have
their destination information on the public network, nor will drivers
put personal information, but they can work on an open trust model where
they are known by dispatch, who has code names for them, and operates a
queue app which simply adds drivers as the arrive near the Airport and
pushes the most senior driver to the top of the stack, which is passed
along to a rider. Another Operator might be the one who runs the trust
network for the drivers, verifying everyone and organizing meetings for
the whole cooperative. This can be used to unionize existing workforces
quickly as well, building ad hoc networks which are very hard to
suppress visible to everyone on their mobile devices on a local wifi
network.

The same model holds for places where workers congregate looking for
short term construction work. Those locations can have a server where an
Operator runs a labor marketplace where a much larger and deeper labor
pool can now advertise, but without all having to be in the physical
location. This means a crowd of a dozen workers looking for work can be
replaced by an Operator with a sign pointing to the domain where the
copy of the market is hosted. Workers who come by can leave an ad on the
local Raspberry Pi Geometron server, and anyone coming by looking for
construction labor can just scroll through a now much deeper collection
of ads and call whoever they need to hire. A market place like this can
suddenly go from a dozen general laborers to a construction labor market
which includes specialists like plumbers and electricians as well as
much larger general contractors just looking to save on marketing costs.
A person holding a cardboard sign on a street corner by a giant box home
improvement store can now potentially be the broker of an information
network on which millions of dollars of commerce flow.

### Trash Robot

The Trash Robot is a self-replicating set of things described later in
this work. It consists of an open brand combined with a way to create
self-replicating symbols which represent in principle anything one can
express with language. We use the Geometron system and the Street
Network as a vehicle to distribute Trash Robot.

Trash Robot icon printers form the basis of a symbolic economy. This
means that we construct self-replicating physical media which can have
symbols representing anything, and we use these symbols to communicate
with each other about how to replicate things. In a numerical economy we
exchange money for goods or services based on a numerical evaluation of
the “value” of those goods or services. In Trash Robot we use the
Geometron language to make constructions of pure geometry which can be
used to organize our thoughts and discussions as we share with one
another self-replicating technology of all kinds.

Trash robot consists of a collection of methods for building the robots
and operating existing machines to make all these icons symbols, as well
as the open brand of the fashion and accessories and arts and crafts
which symbolize the system. This brand consists of googly eyes,
rainbows, black cotton flannel, cut felt and rainbow duct tape over
cardboard and bamboo. By being a very recognizable brand identity which
is generic enough to be impossible to copyright, we make a vehicle for
technology which is not property to freely replicate.

[Next chapter: Servers](scrolls/servers.md)
